SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE (#498)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

  protocol error and SHOULD terminate the session with a Protocol
  Violation ({{session-termination}}).

x (t):

: Indicates that x consists of a variable length integer encoding as
  described in ({{?RFC9000, Section 16}}), followed by that many variable length
  tuple fields, each of which are encoded as (b) above.

> 

Reviewer: thanks for this.

  protocol error and SHOULD terminate the session with a Protocol
  Violation ({{session-termination}}).

x (t):

> : Indicates that x consists of a variable length integer encoding as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: Indicates that x is a tuple, consisting of a variable length integer encoded as
```

  described in ({{?RFC9000, Section 16}}), followed by that many variable length

>   tuple fields, each of which are encoded as (b) above.

Reviewer 3: Tiny nit but I don't love this syntax for this. It would be hard for someone reading this out of the blue to figure this out. But agree with the encoding , just wish there was less confusing syntax to do this.

Reviewer 2: I agree that this is non-obvious.  Should we burn some characters and make it "x (tup)" or "x (tuple)"?

Author: I'll try it with x (tuple) and see what folks think

Reviewer 3: yah, I like that x(tuple) proposal. ( and of course I don't care deeply if we keep it like it is, either way works for me )

with it.  A track name identifies an individual track within the
namespace.

> Track namespace is an N-tuple of bytes where N can be between 1 and 32.  The

Reviewer: not sure if we need to limit the number of tuples. but we should instead have limit on the overall length.

Reviewer: I wonder if we need this to be "Ordered N-tuple" .

Author: The limit on the number of tuples allows the relay to bound the complexity of a tree-structure used to implement tuple prefix matching.

Ordered tuple seems more specific, I'll update it.

structured nature of Track Namespace allows relays and applications to
manipulate prefixes of a namespace. Track name is a sequence of bytes.

In this specification, both the Track Namespace tuple fields and the Track Name
are not constrained to a specific encoding. They carry a sequence of bytes and
comparison between two Track Namespace tuple fields or Track Names is done by
exact comparison of the bytes. Specifications that use MoQ Transport may
constrain the information in these fields, for example by restricting them to
UTF-8. Any specification that does needs to specify the canonicalization into

> the bytes in the Track Namespace or Track Name such that exact comparison works.

Reviewer: I think need to add text on what happens when certain tuples are missing in subscribes and how to ensure the match is happening at the right tuple or should we constrain saying a if tuple is not specified, rest of the tuple elments MUST be ignored for comparision

Author: As I have defined it, you cannot omit a tuple in SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE.  eg: if a namespace is (a, b, c) and your prefix is (a, c), c is compared against b, and does not match.

Reviewer: ah .. makes sense .. thanks

with it.  A track name identifies an individual track within the
namespace.

Track namespace is an ordered N-tuple of bytes where N can be between 1 and 32.
The structured nature of Track Namespace allows relays and applications to

> manipulate prefixes of a namespace. Track name is a sequence of bytes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
match on prefixes of a namespace. Track name is a sequence of bytes.
```

#### AUTHORIZATION INFO Parameter {#authorization-info}

AUTHORIZATION INFO parameter (key 0x02) identifies a track's authorization
information in a SUBSCRIBE, SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or ANNOUNCE message. This
parameter is populated for cases where the authorization is required at the

> track level. The value is an ASCII string.

Reviewer: just noted, the value of token needs to be opaque bytes not ASCII string :-D

Author: Please open a new issue :P

> track level. The value is an ASCII string.

Reviewer 4: Do we require different AUTH tokens for different components of the namespace, or do we assume that the token structure is sophisticated enough to match the tuple boundaries? For example, do we envisage one token that allows you to subscribe to 

`example.com/conference/session12345/`

but at the same time blocks you from

`example.com/conference`

Author: I think we need auth schemes that allow for that distinction.

Reviewer 3: I think we should go with if you have token for a more general space, it covers all the more specific spaces. Anything else just get too slow to do all the ACL checks.  So if you have a token for a/b/* is covers a/b/c

Author: Are we ok for now but just including an AUTH blob in the request and punting the details?  Or do we need something specific here?

Reviewer 3: I think we should just leave all auth out of this PR for now and deal with it when we fix auth across the whole protocol.

Author: That sounds good.  I'm keeping the update here that indicates this track parameter can be used for SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE, which will be a good placeholder when we come to the auth conversation.

~~~
TRACK_STATUS_REQUEST Message {
  Track Namespace (t),
  Track Name (b),
}
~~~
{: #moq-track-status-request-format title="MOQT TRACK_STATUS_REQUEST Message"}

## SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE {#message-subscribe-ns}

> The subscriber sends the SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE control message to a publisher to

Reviewer 2: Are there use cases where you'd only want new ANNOUNCEs and not old ones?  ie: Disconnect and reconnect?

We could make ANNOUNCE a special type of Object that relays understand, and then if you subscribe to a prefix of a track, you get a subscription to all ANNOUNCEs for that namespace.

Then the only real mechanism one has is subscriptions, which is sort of nice.  And you could ask for only new announces if you wanted, or to resume updates from some point?

I guess the negative here is you'd want a way to not retrieve any announces that were obsolete?

Author: CC: @kixelated who had a similar idea -- there's a special track that contains the ANNOUNCE messages as objects.

You could sort of mitigate the negative by marking cancelled announce objects as "Not Exists".  

You'd need to have a reserved name for such a track, which is kind of strange.  Should we pivot to that direction or folks like it as is?

Reviewer 2: I like it, but I'd like to move forward with this first, because it unlocks some other follow-on changes.

request the current set of matching announcements, as well as future updates to
the set.

~~~

> SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE Message {

Reviewer 2: If I do SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE to "foo" and "foo/bar", do I get announces for "foo/bar" once or twice?

Reviewer 2: Also, if I could associate an ANNOUNCE with a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE, I could omit the prefix portion, which might save quite a few bytes on the wire.

Author: > If I do SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE to "foo" and "foo/bar", do I get announces for "foo/bar" once or twice?

I think twice?  Maybe we should disallow overlapping SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE for this reason?  We can say that if you receive a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE for (foo) when you already had (foo, bar), you cancel the (foo, bar) one.

Author: > Also, if I could associate an ANNOUNCE with a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE, I could omit the prefix portion, which might save quite a few bytes on the wire.

That would have to be optional because the protocol allows for blind ANNOUNCE messages.  But I agree it's a nice optimization, and would allow for de-duplicating if we allowed overlapping SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE prefixes.

Reviewer 2: This is honestly one of the things I never understood about ANNOUNCE.  When and how does one decide to send you a blind ANNOUNCE message?  If you want all the ANNOUNCE messages you could now use SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE with no prefix, correct?

Author: > If you want all the ANNOUNCE messages you could now use SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE with no prefix, correct?

Correct.

> When and how does one decide to send you a blind ANNOUNCE message?

The only place where moqt requires ANNOUNCE is when the publisher is connected to a generic relay.  There are other uses but I think they will be described in higher level protocols?

Reviewer 2: Given this design, I think saying you can't have two overlapping SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACEs works and I can't see any case it causes problems.

Author: I added a section below stating overlap is an error

~~~
TRACK_STATUS_REQUEST Message {
  Track Namespace (t),
  Track Name (b),
}
~~~
{: #moq-track-status-request-format title="MOQT TRACK_STATUS_REQUEST Message"}

## SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE {#message-subscribe-ns}

The subscriber sends the SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE control message to a publisher to
request the current set of matching announcements, as well as future updates to
the set.

~~~
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE Message {
  Track Namespace Prefix (t),
  Number of Parameters (i),
  Parameters (..) ...,
}
~~~
{: #moq-transport-subscribe-ns-format title="MOQT SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE Message"}

* Track Namespace Prefix: An N-Tuple of byte fields which are matched against
track namespaces known to the publisher.  For example, if the publisher is a
relay that has received ANNOUNCE messages for namespaces ("example.com",

> "meeting", "123", "participant=100") and ("example.com", "meeting", "123",

Reviewer: this example is bit misleading but the intent is fine. May be better way to say is
("example.com", "meeting/123", "participant/100")

The mix of a=b, vs split info is confusing.

Author: Good point.  I'll restructure the example to make it more clear.

"participant=200"), a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE for ("example.com", "meeting", "123")

> would match both.

Reviewer: this is a good example. Same comment as missing tuple element applies here too.  Say if we  had following tuple

ANNOUNCE messages for namespaces ("example.com", "location/earth",
"meeting/123", "participant/100") and ("example.com", "meeting/123", "location/earth",
"participant/200"), a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE for ("example.com",  "location/earth",) should match both the tuples as well. 

Another example 

ANNOUNCE messages for namespaces ("example.com", "location/earth",
"meeting/123", "participant/100") and ("example.com", "meeting/123", 
"participant/200"), a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE for ("example.com",  "location/earth") should only the first one. 

@afrind what are your thoughts ?

Author: My first cut at this only performs prefix matching, rather than arbitrary non-prefix matches as in your example.  The goal was to limit the complexity required to implement SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE efficiently in relays.

Do you have use cases that cannot be represented as prefixes that would require arbitrary match?

Reviewer: No prefix match works. May be i misread the details.

Author: I misread your examples too but I think we're still on the same page.

If the namespaces are (a, b, c, x) and (a, b, c, y), SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE(a, b) matches both.

If the namespaces are (a, b, c, x) and (a, c, y), SUBSCRIBE_NAMEPACE(a, b) only matches the first one.

* Parameters: The parameters are defined in {{version-specific-params}}.

The publisher will respond with SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE_OK or
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE_ERROR.  If the SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE is successful,
the publisher will forward any matching ANNOUNCE messages to the subscriber

> that it has not yet sent.  If the set of matching ANNOUNCE messages changes, the

Reviewer: Today ANNOUNCE message doesn't get sent to the subscriber.  Do we intend for the subscriber to issue Subscribe once it receives announce ?

Author: The ANNOUNCE message can be sent by any publisher to any subscriber.  Today, the draft does not require ANNOUNCE before subscribe and this PR does not change that.  I was looking for text that indicates the optionality of ANNOUNCE and we don't seem to have it, but we should.

As for how SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE works, the function is to make the subscriber aware of the announcements known to the publisher (which could be a relay, but doesn't have to be), hence this PR communicates those in the form of the ANNOUNCE / UNANNOUNCE messages themselves.  The general pattern I expect is that the subscriber would issue some subscribes in response to the ANNOUNCE's received in response to SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE.

Reviewer: That makes sense.  thanks

that it has not yet sent.  If the set of matching ANNOUNCE messages changes, the
publisher sends the corresponding ANNOUNCE or UNANNOUNCE message.

A subscriber cannot have overlapping namespace subscriptions outstanding at the
same time.  If a publisher receives a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE with a Track Namespace
Prefix that is a prefix of an earlier SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE request or vice versa,
it MUST respond with SUBSCRIBE_ERROR, with error code

> SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE_OVERLAP.

Reviewer: I am not sure if this should be treated as an error. A relay can receive 2 different namespaces from 2 different subscribers that overlap.

Author: I intended that it's an error for the same subscriber to make overlapping subscribes in the same session.  A relay should be fine to receive overlapping subscribes from different sessions.  This PR doesn't define any normative behavior for forwarding SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE, but this clause would enforce coalescing overlaps on a single session (via UNSUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE).
